## Pri-miRNA quantification from single-cell RNA-seq datasets

MiRNA genes called pri-miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II, similarly as protein-coding genes. In order to quantify their transcriptional activity, we used the annotation developed in Bouvy-Liivrand et al, 2017 and extended in Turunen et al, 2021 and 'Hernández de Sande et al, 2023'(https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.10.09.561173v2) to quantify pri-miRNA transcripts from single-cell RNA-seq datasets.

You can find code related to the analysis in this repository. The data objects with miRNA gene counts and cell type metadata are hosted at https://kana.rahtiapp.fi/ for interactive analysis.

### STEP 0. Custom Reference Genome.

A new gtf file was generated by combining annotated genes and pri-miRNAs and filtered for the cellranger pipeline using `cellranger mkgtf` command. Finally, both (i) the custom gtf file and (ii) fasta file from the chosen genome are used to generate a new custom genome with `cellranger mkref` command. 

* GTF file can be found under "reference_genome"

### 1. Atlas Dataset Analysis  

#### Tabula Muris Senis dataset (TMS). 
This consortium generated single-cell RNA-seq libraries prepared with either 10x Genomics droplet technology or by sorting the cells and capturing RNA-seq profiles with Smart-seq2 technology. In this example analysis we used data from tissues including Spleen, Liver, Heart and Aorta, Fat and Bown Marrow at 1m, 3m, 18m, 21m, 24m and 30m of age, as available. 


1) TMS datasets were download from the amazon cloud using the following commands:

* **10X data:** ```aws s3 cp s3://czb-tabula-muris-senis/10x/FASTQs/ . --exclude "*" --include {selected file} --recursive --no-sign-request``` 
* **Plate-seq data:** ```aws s3 ls s3://czb-tabula-muris-senis/Plate_seq/{mouse age: 1m, 3m, 18m, 21m, 24m or 30m} . --exclude "*" --include {selected file} --recursive --no-sign-request```

2) Quantification of scRNA-seq datasets using the custom genome containing genes and pri-miRNAs.
```bash
$cellranger_folder=/cellranger-3.1.0/
$fastqs={list of folders containing fastqs correspoding to the samples as in TMS_Datasets_Summary.cvs "sample.id"}
$id=output folder
$ref=custom genome
$localcores=cpus used to run the analysis
$localmem=local memory reserved for running the analysis

{cellranger_folder}/cellranger count --id=$id"_primirs" --transcriptome=$ref --fastqs=$fastq_files --sample=$id --localcores=$localcores --localmem=$localmem --disable-ui
````

3) Both 10x and Plate-seq datasets were filtered (1_filtering_droplet.ipynb and 1_filtering_plate_seq.ipynb) and cell type markers were detected using Scanpy. Comparison of old vs young cells was performed comparing the gene expression distributions with the tool scDD.


### 2. Gene expression changes during disease development in atherosclerosis mouse model 

1) Quantification of scRNA-seq datasets using the custom mm10 genome containing genes and pri-miRNAs as previouysly described.
2) Cell vs background droplet detection and hashtag demultiplexing
3) QC filtering and clustering
4) Integration and label transfer
5) Marker gene analysis of myeloid cells
